[Silence.]
On July 24th, 1969, a date in human history largely forgotten, man from the moon
first landed on planet Earth. I believe that this nation should commit itself to
achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and
returning him safely to the Earth. The second equally critical portion of John
F. Kennedy's 1961 challenge had been realized. The Apollo 11 crew, Neil
Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Michael Collins, had flown a near-perfect first
mission to the moon. It would be a tough act to follow. These three astronauts
were waiting to try. Charles Pete Conrad, Alan Bean, and Dick Gordon. Thirty
years later, the second crew to land on the moon got together to remember an
electrifying launch, a pinpoint landing, and friendships forged in flight. Here
are their memories of that intrepid voyage. Roger, copy.
[Music.]
[Silence.]
The men who would become the crew of the Apollo 12 were each chosen for the manned space program in its
earliest days. Pete Conrad was a decorated Navy test pilot who graduated from
Princeton University with a degree in aeronautical engineering. He had flown
twice in the two-man Gemini program serving as commander on Gemini 11. Richard F
Gordon, Jr. also flew in the Navy's test pilot program. He earned a chemical
engineering degree from the University of Washington. Gordon came to NASA in the
third group of astronauts and and flew with Conrad on Gemini 11. Alan L. Bean
was chosen for the Astronaut Corps in 1963. Also a Naval Aviator, he had
graduated from the University of Texas with a degree in aeronautical
engineering. He had not flown in the space program, but had served as backup on
Gemini 10. I reported in in 62, the end of 62, and you guys came in the end of
63. We came into NASA together and the astronauts in the third group. Our
selection was October 63. three. Pete was already there. Pete was in the Mercury
selection, and he and I were together in the second selection group. He made it
and I didn't. That had some psychological effect on me, I'm sure. But the main
thing is that we were all navy, we were carrier pilots, and that's why all the
equipment performed so well, because Dick Allen and I all did our job. And if
you're a really good carrier pilot, going to the The responsibility of selecting
the Apollo crews fell to Donald Deke SLayton. Picked as one of the original seven
Mercury astronauts, Sladen never flew in the program after a medical exam
revealed an irregular heartbeat. He remained with NASA eventually to become
Director of Flight Crew Operations. When the Gemini program was officially over,
the last flight being Gemini 12 and that was Jim Lovell and Buzz Aldrin, I sort
of remember Deke had a seance with each potential crew commander or crew
commander by calling them in and I can only speak on my case where he said
you're going to be a crew commander and Dick's going to go fly your command
module and he said, here are five guys. You can pick a LM pilot. and I wanted
Al and he was off doing something and you were working on
AAP called and ended up being Skylip. And so I picked another fellow that had
been a student of mine at test pilot school that I knew which was CC Williams he
was a Marine. Clifford C. Williams Junior from Mobile, Alabama was a major in
the Marine Corps and a graduate of the Navy test pilot school at Patuxent River
Maryland. We were training on nine, and C.C. got killed. In an airplane. Right.
And so I went and said, okay, Al's got to come, which he did. C.C. Williams died
in the crash of his T-38 near Tallahassee, Florida, on October 5, 1967. He was
35. The Apollo 12 mission patch carries a fourth star in his memory. It's
interesting to me now that when Cece got killed, it never dawned on me that I
might replace him. I didn't even think about that sort of stuff anymore. And I
was going out to the airplane one day to go somewhere to follow an applications
meeting, and Pete says, you got a minute, and we went inside an area there, and
he said, how would you like to fly with me? It caught me completely by surprise
because I hadn't even been given up on it, even though I had a broken heart
about it. I'd given it, you know, I said, well, And you've been surprised ever
since. You have . Anyhow, I knew that once you could get on a crew, back up a
prime, then you were in the rotation. So we were gonna back up nine, so we'd
probably fly 12. How do you get to the moon? The intrepid voyage will continue.
[Music.]
[Silence.]
Central to any NASA mission was the flight director. Gerald Griffin, a former
Air Force pilot, had the responsibility of shepherding Apollo 12's trip to the
moon. Mercury had just finished when I came to work for NASA. And we had already
had the challenge to go to the moon. And if you really think about it, Gemini
and Apollo were really kind of the same program. So was Mercury. It was all
leading toward a lunar landing. We actually started working on Apollo 12 well
before Apollo 11 landed. Training for the lunar trip was extensive and
repetitive. Numerous flights on the aptly named Vomit Comet, a converted Boeing
707 which simulated weightlessness, gave the crew an opportunity to practice
mission activities in near-zero gravity. Scientific experiments would have to be
placed on the lunar surface, so Conrad and Bean were schooled on their
deployment. Attention to detail and a strict adherence to specific timelines
were essential to the mission's success. After months of training and countless
simulations, launch time was finally at hand. On November 14, 1969, the crew of
Apollo 12 sat atop the massive Saturn V, waiting for a go from the controllers.
We had simulated everything. I think the simulations and the training is
probably much more difficult than the actual flight itself because you're
dealing with emergencies in almost every instance. And we had been in the suits
together and in the command model. so it was a familiar environment. I
thoroughly enjoyed it. It was anticipatory. It was exciting. We're going to
finally get to go. I had a more sense of relief than I did anything else. By
golly, the training's over, and we get to go fly this thing. Of course, when
Pete looked out the window, there was a black cloud and a little bit of rain
coming down. Well, my feeling there was that maybe we're not going. We've done
this hundreds of times, literally, in the vehicle, on the pad, and also in the
simulator. And it wasn't until about 15 minutes prior to flight that I said to
myself, you know, we're really going today. I think the big thing was that if
you did scrub, it's not until the next day. You scrubbed for 28 days. You had to
wait for a whole cycle. Lunar cycle. Lunar cycle. Lunar lighting cycle. The
Saturn launch vehicle has to be one of the greatest accomplishments of all time.
Thank God for those Germans that we got after the war and that they congregated
together under von Braun at Huntsville because those guys produced a vehicle
that we have never seen anything like before or since. It was so big, 360 feet
high, and 32 feet in diameter, something like that, at the first stage. Really a
massive, massive vehicle. The integrity of that giant booster would be put to
the test just 36 seconds into the mission. The funny thing is all during
training when Pete and Dick and I would be maybe having a drink afterwards or
something, we'd say, boy, that was a tough day of training. We did this and this
and Pete says, yeah, we got to get this all done. We got to learn this. But if
anything happens and it will, it'll be something we never trained for sometime
during the mission. And Dick and I used to talk about that. Well, he knows best,
he's the commander. 36 seconds into the mission, something happens we never trained for.
[Silence.]
The launch of Apollo 12 was into some weather that we had
never launched in quite that bad before. We had launched in some weather but not
as much rain. It was my first time to be a flight director for a launch. It so
happened, it also was the first time that the launch director at the CAPE, a
fellow named Walt Kapryan, Kappy we called him, it was his first launch as a
launch director. So Kappy and I were new to the game in terms of, we had been
through a zillion launches, but it was the first time I had control at mission
control and he had control at launch control. And the weather out the window,
Pete was the only one that could see it, but the ground was concerned. They had
an airplane in-flight to check for lightning. Well Air Force One was the last
guy down. They said no thunder storm. We did not have any indication that there
was lightning in the area. Had there been a lot of lightning strikes or anything
like that, I suspect we would have held. That final decision was actually made
at the CAPE by the launch director, who in this case was Walt Kapryan. If we
didn't go that day, the lunar cycle is 28 days, so we would have had to have
waited another month before we were going to fly. And the President was there,
and everything else was ready. And nobody knew. I'd like to think that we didn't
launch just because President Nixon was there. Oh yeah, it was true. But it was
heavy. It was heavy rain. And I can tell you there's a myth that no reason we
launched was because Nixon was there, and that's not true. Nobody ever even
talked about it. But we thought it was a good time to go. You get one of these
things, the Saturn V, you get it loaded, it's a big
job, there's a lot of high energy involved. And if you can launch, you'd rather
go ahead and go rather than have to unload it and do that all again. But all
these forces are involved and someone says, well how about launching into a
cloud? I'm sure they said, we never did it, it looks okay to us, fly air planes
through crowds. Our forces were ready to go. Yes. You are thinking our boat was,
let's launch. 10, 9, 8, ignition sequence vires. 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. All
engines running. Commit. Liftoff. We have liftoff. 11.22 a.m. Eastern Standard
Time. Pete Conrad reports that your program is in.
Tower tidal. I'm pitching a roll program, and this may be a really going. Pete
Conrad reporting the roll-in pitch program to put Apollo 12 on the proper
course. A few seconds after launch, 30-40 seconds after launch, something
happened.
40 seconds. This room, every light in here on these consoles went bright. There
was red lights. Pete started talking to us that he saw all kinds of lights in
the cockpit, warning lights. Okay, we just lost the platform, gang. I don't know
what happened here. We had everything in the world drop out. Roger. Fuel cell
lights, an AC bus light, a fuel cell disconnect, AC bus overload 1 and 2, main
bus A and B out. I don't know what happened. I'm not sure if you can get hit by
lightning. My first thought was, I can't believe this is happening. We had 11
electrical warning lights associated with the electrical panel, and in all our
simulations and double failures and triple failures, they'd never figured out
how to light all 11 with what that. But they were all on. We had lost our data.
We had no data here at all. And we were going strictly by his cues that
something had happened. Pete's the guy that had the switch that aborted if
something really went wrong this bad because this was bad enough to abort. We
thought we might have to abort. We never said that. but you never say that word
on the radio, for fear that it may be the only word they hear. Shortly
thereafter, we lost the attitude reference system from the IMU. The main primary
ball just started doing this maneuver, tumbling. The only thing we lost now is
the ISS. Our number 1 ball is just drippin' all over the place, and we'll have
to catch it later. Roger, Dick. All five engines were still burning. I then
looked at the front wall plot, and we were gaining altitude. GDC, Gyro Display
Coupler, was driving a second reference system, and it was okay. I said, Ecom,
what do you see? And there was a delay. He said, Stand by flight. And very
shortly thereafter, he said, have him put the SCE switch to aux. And a young
man, he was 23 years old, John Aaron, made that call. When John said S.C.E. to
AUX, I said, What? And he repeated it. And I turned to the CAPCOM who had to get
the message up to the crew, and I said, SCE to AUX. And the CAPCOM said,
What? And finally, John came back in, he said, Signal Conditioning Equipment to
Auxiliary. So the CAPCOM, who was Jerry Carr, read it up that way. and
thankfully Al Bean knew where that switch was. Apollo 12 Houston, try SCE to
auxiliary over. NCE to auxiliary. SCE SCE to auxiliary. I looked at those lights
and looked at Al and I said, OK Al, it's all yours! when he put the switch into
the auxiliary position, viola, the whole room we had data again. Later on Al
asked me why didn't I help him. I needed help. He wasn't quite as polite as he
did right now. I didn't help you out because I didn't know what the hell to do.
An abort in that vehicle would not have been a very good thing to do. It's an
esCAPE tower that pulled this thing off. You didn't want to do it unless you
really knew you had to. We became the longest lightning rod in history. We
learned a lot that day on Apollo 12. We were all weathered test pilots who
wanted to go anyway, so that was our pitch decision
that we should golly and launch. They never did it again, I'd say that!
Obviously, after that, we said, we'll never do that again.
The Saturn V and its precious payload eased into Earth orbit, having overcome
the extraordinary events during launch. An assessment of spacecraft systems was
in order. Astronaut safety was dependent on the integrity of the Apollo craft.
Had the vehicle been damaged by the electrical charge? Explosive events
happen, staging and doing this, deploying parachutes and whatnot, and They were
very concerned that the PYRO's may have been affected in the recovery system.
Right on the nose of the thing. They made the right decision. I didn't even
think about it. I don't know whether you two guys did or not. I didn't think
about it till somebody told me about it 25 years later. I think that's exactly
right. But they say, we'd better bring them back home. Let's go to the moon. The
punchline is we'd have been as dead coming in from Earth orbit as we would
coming from the moon. So let's go. The story of how we made the decision to go
onto the moon has, in my view, has kind of undergone some changes over the
years, which is fairly typical. If that discussion was had, and I was the flight
director, it was never brought to my attention. We never talked about, at least
in this room, somebody may have somewhere, but in this room we never talked
about, well, we don't have anything to lose by going onto the moon. In fact
again, John Aaron, this young 23 year old, 23, 24, something like that, made the
call that I think, the second call that he made that I thought really made a
difference in this flight. And he said, why don't we just go through the check
list just like we were going to do a TEI burn, trans-earth injection, to head
home from the MET and if that looks ok, we're probably all right. So it was time
to let Conrad and company know that the translunar injection burn had been
authorized and they were heading to the Moon. Apollo 12, Houston. The good word
is your Gopher-TLA. Hoopy-doo. We're ready. We didn't expect anything else. We
didn't train for anything else, Pete. You better believe it. Saturn V performed
exactly as it was supposed to do. It wasn't affected one bit in its performance.
That's right. The instrument unit of the Saturn V never belched. Once we got
collected and in orbit and realigned the platform, the only thing that we lost
in the command module was the field quantities system for the RCS. The
activities going out to the Moon, and likewise coming back from the Moon, were
fairly very benign and, frankly, I think more for the crew than the ground. A
little bit boring. The ground was busy the entire time. We never stopped. We
could always figure out something to work on. We're trying all these things that
we didn't have in Gemini, like toothpaste and shaving and we're really having a
ball up here. Roger. All dressed up and no place to go. Well, we're going some
place we can see it get bigger and bigger all the time.
Design and construction of the Lunar Lander began in the early 60s. It was an
unattractive and angular transport, but pound-for-pound, the most efficient
spacecraft ever made. The most absolute paramount concern on the LM was how
much it weighed and so I was involved when we decided to take the seats out and
we would fly the vehicles standing up. I also was involved in doing all the
egress work of getting out of the LM to get down on a lunar surface. This all
took place in 64, 63, 64 timeframe. frame we had a round hatch to come out and
we had a square backpack and we couldn't give it out that was the one I was
going to mention that that was changed and of course the round hatch wasn't
satisfactory so we made it the square hatch the thing I remember most was a
meeting with Pete early on and Dick was there and Grumman had all these neat
controls and displays and as I say Pete was in charge of this thing and Pete
says to them he says why what kind of ga- what kind of gauges do you have on
this assent engine? And, and they said, well, we got this, tells you the
pressure in the combustion chamber and how much fuel you have left and several
other things. And Pete says, Well, what do you do if, if the combustion pressure
is too high? Nothing you can do. How about if it's too low? Nothing. Well, how
about if your gas is too much? Can't do anything. How about too little? Can't do
anything about that either, and Pete says, why don't you take the gauges out? I
mean, if something goes wrong, at least we'll die relaxed. Lunar orbit insertion
was to take place on the far side of the moon. Only after the still-joined
spacecraft came back from radio silence would controllers know if the engine
burn was successful. Apollo 12, Houston. Hello Houston, Yankee, Clipper with
intrepid in tow as has arrived on time. I guess like everybody else, it just
arrived there, all three of us are plastered to the window's looking." A day
later, November 19th, Lunar Module Intrepid separated from the Command Module
Yankee Clipper. Alan Bean and Pete Conrad left Dick Gordon to orbit alone. Dick
Gordon Well, I was kind of sad to see them go but happy for them. But I've
always answered that question that would it feel like to be all alone in orbit
while your friends are on the lunar surface. I answer that by saying if you knew
these two guys you'd be glad to get rid of them for just a little while. There
he goes. I just wanted to wet that damst up Pete. Okay I got minus...
I got minus one and nothing, so forget it. The LAM performed a flawless descent
burn, again on the far side, and was headed for the lunar surface. We just
watched the first Earth rise, which was fantastic. The specific target below was
a crater pattern resembling a snowman's body located in the ocean of storms.
Waiting in that snowman was the Lunar Probe Surveyor 3 which had landed on the
moon two years before. Pete would attempt to park the LM nearby. We knew we
had these crater pattern that we were looking for and Gosh you get the 7,500
feet. Your feet forward face up. When it finally pitches over you really get a
look and and man, I looked out the window. And there's gotta be 10,000 craters
down there and the foggiest idea. Where am I? Okay, we're at a 19,000 feet. I
got some kind of a horizon out there. I got some craters too, but I don't know
where I am yet.
And a bye for P64. Okay. I'm just gonna cheat to look out there. I think I see
my crater. And Al called out the right angle down that you could look through
the site and that's what was so fascinating because I mean here are literally 10
,000 craters out there wherever you look there's craters and gosh you look down
there and bango that little crater pattern popped right up
I'm not sure. 64. They're in here. Get in here! Oh my God, right down the middle of the road!
I'm standing 42 degrees...crater.
Look out there! I can't believe it! Amazing!
Fantastic! 42 degrees, babe! Just keep talking! I'm coming down at about 99 feet
a second, you're looking good! Put him up against him, go for landing. Roger,
logger. 40 degrees, LBD, V. That's so fantastic, I can't believe it. You're at 2
,000 feet. Boys on the ground do okay. 1800 feet up, 39 degrees. 38 degrees, 36
degrees, you're 1200 feet b 1000 feet, coming down at 30 looks good out there
babe, looks good 32 degrees, you're at 800 feet 33 dg, 600 feet Look at that
crater, right where it's supposed to be you're beautiful 240 coming down at 5
Hey you're really manoeuvring around yah come on down okay Okay. 10% fuel. 200
feet. Coming down at three. Easy. Come on down. Okay. 180 feet. 9% you're
looking good. Going to get some dust before long. 96 feet coming down at six.
Slow down the descent rate. 80 feet coming down at four. You're looking good. 50
feet coming down. Watch for the dust. 40 coming down at two. Looking good. Watch
for the dust. Coming down at two feet. You got plenty of gas. Plenty of gas
dude. Hang in there. 30 seconds. Eighteen feet. Coming down at two. He's got it
made. Come on in there. Twenty-four feet. Contact light. Roger, copy contact.
Pro. Yes, pro. Okay. In the film off. Okay. Once I could leave the script, you
got your command over right off. Yep. Turned out the resolution of the film was
such that anything that wasn't six feet or bigger didn't show up, And there were
some five-foot boulders there. It wasn't no suitable spot. So I flew around to
the far side, to the two o'clock position, and landed. That's when Al had not
flown the LLTV, and he makes a remark in there, because, man, I'm at home. I'm
just driving. I was used to flying helicopters. And when you change direction in
helicopters, you have a certain feeling on your bottom of your feet or your
pants. And you were far exceeding that. I thought well what's he doing? But I
didn't have time to look out. I had to keep looking at the computer trying to
support you but I was getting a little worried. What's he doing down here? So I
was glad when you informed me it was going okay. When it finally did land and I
was really surprised how close to the edge of the crater I was behind me. I
thought I'd given it plenty of room. The atmosphere in here was very much like
Apollo 11 and the subsequent missions that came after 12. Quiet, disciplined,
only the people talking that needed to be. Where Neil and Buzz had been more of
a business-like bunch
to deal with, Buzz and Neil were not ones to make big quips and all that.
Contrast that with Conrad, who came right behind him. And Conrad was just all
the time, you know, making a whiz-bang-flap- splap kind of thing. And his
comments during the landing were Pete Conrad personified. Boy, we're coming
right down with this baby, right down the middle. And then his comment when he
stepped off on the moon was very similar. where Neil had been very historical
and Pete was very funny. So the landing and listening to Pete, you could just
tell he was having a ball. Those less than famous first words from the moon's
third visitor when the intrepid voyage continues.
[Silence.]
That's one small step for man, one
giant leap for mankind.
Yeah, I'm okay. I had a wager
going that this person was convinced we had a big propaganda department and that
Neil's words were done by the propaganda department, and I said I doubt that
very seriously. I suspect that those words are pretty much Neil's. He may have
gone and asked somebody for some help, but it was entirely up to him to figure
out what he was going to say, and this person absolutely flat wouldn't believe
me. So we had a bet, 500 bucks, and I was the smallest guy in the office, and I
said, nobody remembers what the second person said anyhow. And so let alone who
they are or anything, and so I said, well, I'll just say it may have been a
little one for Neil well but it was a big one for a small fella like me and I
think I left out the small fella. Did you ever collect? No. Never did. No they
were paid. It wasn't long before Pete Conrad, now outside the LM, could see
they had realized a prime goal of the mission. Boy you'll never believe it. Just
what I see sits on the side of the crater. Your old surveyor I'm your old
surveyor yes sir. Does that like me? It can't be any further than 600 feet from
here. How about that? Orbiting overhead, Dick Gordon spotted Intrepid, and
eventually the Surveyor. I hate the Surveyor. I hate the Surveyor. Well done,
Clipper. Using the sextant, you don't really see the Lunar Monitor or see the
Surveyor Crater, but I was so confident of our tracking in landmark when i heard
pete say there's the old surveyor that i could see the lunar module as a bright
spot of light with a very long pencil like shadow we didn't have the rover at
that time and so we had to walk everywhere and we wanted to make sure we
explored certain areas and got to the surveyor so we had to be near that crater
because if we weren't you've never got we'd never gotten there couldn't have
found it couldn't gotten there so just being there and that's the first thing we
talked about it in time several times. Pete would say when I get down I'm going
look and see if surveyor's there, because we wonder. And sure now that's the
first thing he said. The first thing he said is there's the old surveyor. Yes
then we knew our second EVA, which when we would go to surveyor, we actually had
somewhere to go and we'd probably get the parts and do the things that we were
supposed to do. Pete Conrad began to collect soil samples in case a quick
departure was needed. His obvious enjoyment and his work would have made the
Seven Dwarfs proud.
Al Bean joined Pete on the surface. Okay. Yeah, I'll pull the hatch closed here.
Okay. Don't block it.
And if I'd have landed 20 feet behind where I landed, we'd have landed right
smack at that crater. The sole setback for the Apollo 12 crew was the failure of
the color camera that was to be deployed for live television. Okay, Houston, I'm
gonna move the TV camera now. and the first place the camera on Neil's flight
was black and white. We had the first color camera, which we never laid our eyes
on until we were on the lunar surface. We always played with a block. I think we
might have seen it when they stowed it but if I remember right, it didn't show
up until about four days before the flight and so we had never, ever had an
opportunity to do anything with that camera, but you had it. It was on the Mesa,
so when you came down it showed you You were out there about 15 minutes
collecting a sample in case we had to leave early. We'd leave to have some rocks
and do some other things, spotting surveyor. Then I got down and my first job
was to take it out of there and put it on the surface and point it towards us so
everybody on earth could see what we were doing. So it's real nice moving around
up there, you don't seem to get tired. It really hop like a bunny.
There or, where is earth? There it is.
And there's the TV. And is it pointing towards the sun? That's fair. I didn't
know and should have known that you can't point a TV camera to the sun. I mean,
everybody knows that. Every school kid knows that. Only I didn't know it. And so
when I took it out, I wasn't careful at all. And I pointed it at the sun. How
does that look, Houston? It still looks the same, Al. We have a very bright
image at the top and blacked out at 80% of the bottom. When he set it up, it was
just one of these things that happened. It had enough of the sun in the field of
view that it burned out the sensing device. Or I guess the guts of it. So we
ended up without any television except for that little bitty piece in the very
front end. We were already airborne on the 14th of November. When we got back,
there was this Nasa letterhead paper sitting on the top of my desk back at Nasa
after the whole thing was over. And it was a whole thing about, don't point the
camera into the sun, but it was dated 17 November. A little side story there. Al
Bean is from the same hometown I am, Fort Worth. I went to Arlington Heights
high school and he went to Paschal high school so we were always rivals.
We didn't know each other until the space program, but anyway, in those days we
were rivals. And then as fate would have it, he went off to the University of
Texas to get his college degrees and I went to Texas A&M University. So again we
were these rivals. Well, when the thing happened with the camera, it gave me
great pleasure to tell him that those Paschal guys and those University of Texas
guys just never had it figured out. If they'd sent an Aggie or an Arlington
Heights High School graduate or something like that up there, we'd have done it
right. While exploring the ocean of storms, Conrad and Bean found they had some
unexpected company. The spiral notebooks attached to the cuffs of their space
suits had instructions for reference during EVAs along with a surprise or two.
All the flight equipment is stowed on board after its final review by the backup
crew who makes sure everything is there and operative. Seems like our backup
crew had put a few additions into our cuff checklist. First they had some
drawings in there that were like Snoopy and there were some in jokes on them and
I got out on the lunar surface and I minded my own business and I get through a
couple pages and laugh with the little Snoopy jokes and all of a sudden I get to
a page and open it up and it's the play made of the month. What they did was put
the girl in there that seemed to fit what we were doing at the time and that
moment wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a you're doing? Studying hills and
valleys, trying to make some observation! It was always a little clever about
what we were doing, and the best part of it is, though, we never did say
anything. It was a good 20-some years before anybody said anything publicly. You
still have your cuff checklists, and I still have mine. The backup crew and the
prime crew were always doing things to each other that that they didn't tell
anybody about, including us here in the Control Center. And the fact that Pete
was kinda giddy, and giggling and all, that was Pete. That's the way he was all
the time. Both astronauts were excited about where they were and what they were
doing. They knew how fortunate they were to be experiencing the adventure, but
still felt some regret. Just didn't last long enough. We were out two different
times for about three and a half hours each, it just went right by. You know,
you train for all those times, you want to spend more time, you want to spend
three or four days there and be out eight out hours each day. Is that why when
you got back, the phrase was, is that all there is? Yeah, kinda was, well, we
need to do more of this. I mean, we just got here, and here we're leaving. Well,
you hit a very good point. We had exactly the same portable life support system
the rest of the guys did, but NASA was so cautious, And that was my one
frustration, because you don't get tired. You don't get tired and the fact that
they made us come back in, even on the first EVA, I mean they were not going to
let us go by four hours. If I have a frustration today, it's what you just said,
not being able to stay out longer. I think you ought to have to go a longer time
on each EVA.
We felt badly sort of that we got shut off the other day. although we didn't
have the data in real time nor did we have the agreement with the ground that we
weren't going to go past the four hours. But we had six hours' worth of
consumables and we got out early on the second EVA. As far as being tired or
anything, we weren't tired. We could have kept on going. We hustled to get back
just to make our four-hour deadline.
[Music.]
[Silence.]
As time for leaving the moon drew near, Alan Bean began to be concerned the lone
booster rocket beneath him might not operate when called upon. I wasn't calm and
I was, Pete looks over and says I hadn't been saying anything for while Pete
looks over and says, is there anything worrying you or something? And I said,
Yeah, I'm kind of worried if they put this all together, you know, I mean, we're
not going to be here. And then you did order to calm my nerves. You say, Why did
said don't worry about it. It doesn't light. We'll become the first permanent
monument to the U.S. Space Program on the moon. That made me feel good. Three,
two, one, let's go. Now, where do we go? We're going to get a fire going.
We're on our way. And at one minute, go like 22. Okay. It's a pretty quick
ride, if I remember. It's like six minutes or so. Six minutes or so. With no
gauges or anything to know how it's going. No sound. Yeah, and you've got your
guidance gauges, which are telling you you're on the trajectory and everything.
The big shock right off the bat though as soon as we shut down we disappeared in
this little black cloud Inside we had to stay with our face plates and
everything on because we were so dirty and we had this dusty cloud in zero g
inside there and then when we found out how persnickety Dick was because when we
got all joined up, we were ready to get back on board and have a good time. He
wouldn't let us in. We were too tired. Hey, Captain, capture them. OK, steady as
a rock. I really crashed and burned, I remember, there. I was tired. They were
both tired and we had some activities in lunar orbit. landmark cracking
photographing various craters and areas of moon and that was sort of my task but
leaving the moon i i didn't really have a melancholy feeling you're wrapped up
in a tei trans earth injection you're concerned that the sps engine is going to
perform properly you're not I wasn't concerned about it but it was another one
of those dynamic times where you have to make sure everything is right, so you
can leave. Now the only thing you got left is re-entry. Re-entry, that's right.
It took about six minutes to enter. Dick was flying the entry. Eight minutes, to
re-enter. We actually got the 6 G's at the re-entry. What you do, you start with
a lift vector down, so the spacecraft flies into the atmosphere. Once it gets
sub-circular, less than orbital velocity. Where you can't skip out anymore. And
then you start maneuvering. And that's a very, very dynamic, kind of pretty
looking out the window. Yeah and a lot of that and I remember feeling slowing
down and all of a sudden I thought, well, we're bound to be just about ready to,
I didn't have a clock in front of me, it was over near Pete and Dick, so I said,
how much more we got to go? You said something like five minutes. I thought,
what? We must have slowed down thousands. The funny part that I know is that you
have to cut the droves loose before the main parachutes come out. So they don't
tangle up. So you get rid of the drugs, and then there's that moment that you
have no parachute. And you're getting closer to earth. And the mains come out,
and that's when it's really all over. Well, that's what I thought. Yeah, it's
really all over then. And so I'm sitting there. I've got the camera in the
window, and it's looking out at the drugs. And the mains, we've got some great
shots of that, by the way, thanks to me. So I think, you know, I look at my
checklist. my checklist says remove camera from window i think why bother why
bother we're on earth here almost so i didn't move that thing off you know you
got to turn around and put it in the bag and we're almost on the water so i'm
just sitting there thinking this is great when it hits the water bang bang and i
think wow that that's hard i've noticed that dick and peter looking at me and
they're saying punching the breakers what's the hurry you know we just gotta he
just got here. We've been here for a few seconds. I know, I didn't know this.
I'd been banged head with that camera. Well, I didn't even know it at the time,
and so I punched in the circuit. It was only later when you're looking at me
saying, where you been? We didn't find out until later that the camera had come
off the bracket and hit Al in the head. We saw them go stable too, which that
meant the cap sort of flips over and then they have to inflate some bags to get
it back up right. But, we were in communication with them and everything sounded
fine to us and I just don't guess in real time they wanted to admit that, you
know, one of the guys had gotten hit with a camera that I think he should have
stowed, I think the procedures called for him to stow it and he didn't. But
again that's like University of Texas, you know, thing versus Texan and if it
had been an Aggie he would have done it right. After the spacecraft had been
retrieved, the crew was placed in quarantine in case they'd brought back any
lunar germs. So when we walked out the door, 21 days later from when we left the
moon, which was only, what, a couple weeks back on Earth, we were finished. We'd
done all the work. We could go enjoy ourselves. It was a good deal, kind of.
when I also learned that fame is fleeting because I went out the door and my
kids were at school and my wife was someplace else and the only person that was
around was a photographer who wanted to see this big welcome home and there I am
putting a key in the back door of the house all by myself and that was the
headline, poor guy goes home nobody is there! Well, just another day at the
office! Hey! He's lucky you had the key to the house!
Apollo 11 first put a man on lunar soil the words, the eagle has landed, echo a
singular human experience. Apollo 13 has been immortalized by Hollywood as an
endeavor gone wrong, saved by indomitable human spirit and determination.
Although the Apollo 12 flight is today less well-known than either Apollo 11 or
13, the crew of 12 never felt their flight was any less appreciated than the
missions which preceded and followed theirs. You don't remember who flew the
Atlantic second? You don't know who transplanted the second heart and that was
an example I always used. I never felt left out between 11 and 13. I never did.
I never. I was just glad 13 didn't happen to us because we got a chance to get
there and do the thing. No, all of us wanted to fly those spaceships and
everybody kind of wanted to be first because that's competitive way. But when we
weren't we always were happy. I feel that way now. 13 was a failure and it
wasn't until later that people recognized that that may very well have been one
of NASA's finest hours that we save that crew. NASA and the crew themselves
saved that mission and it became a very well-known success. You say Apollo 13
and everybody knows the story, but at that time I never reflected being in
between 11 and 13 until this very moment. but I still think 12 was the most
interesting one, because of the surveyor. First deployment of a nuclear-powered
station and then the geology. All the other guys did was, nobody got to a
surveyor, and so they had a car to run around in, didn't like. Didn't make them
like us old fellows. One of the things that Pete had said that served us good
all the time we were training and flying was we're going to do this job right,
but we're going to have a good time along the way. And I felt like we always did
do that. And maybe that's one of the reasons we've been such good friends all
the way through there, is he set the tone of doing really good, doing right, but
still having fun, not just making it so serious. Well, if you can't be human,
it's not worth doing, the way I look at it. It's worked out good. Part of being
alive. Here we are. Can't be good? Be cold. Be cold. That's another one. I
always feel like nowadays that I won the lottery twice to get to be on the
mission or just to be part of NASA during these periods when we were trying to
accomplish an impossible dream. Not everybody in their professional life gets
that kind of challenge, you know? A lot of people can do it, but they don't have
the opportunity. But we were selected and went there. And they said, you guys
are going to find a way to go to the moon and walk around and come back. We got
to be part of that and, I don't know. I feel blessed every day. I feel lucky
every single day. Just lucked out of all these people on Earth here. Here we
are. Well I think I would like to have gone that last 60 miles, but I have to be
satisfied with the opportunity I had to fly two missions in the space program.
And I think I think the thing I remember about Apollo, and I think we
universally say this, we've often been asked what we discovered when we went to
the moon and we seemed to respond that we discovered the Earth. And I think when
you think about it or you look at the pictures or Al's painting you can see what
I mean by that statement, we discovered the earth.
Well, along with what Al had to say, I was lucky to fly four.
And I think you guys said it pretty well. We were just lucky to be there. Ten
days after this historic reunion, Pete Conrad was killed in a motorcycle
accident near his home in California. He was 69.
This program is dedicated to the memory of Charles P. Conrad. His love of flying
and his fearless spirit combine to crystallize the image of the astronaut as a
true American hero. He possessed a fierce loyalty to his crewmates, a deep love
for his family, and an unmatched devotion to his country. He will always be
remembered for his childlike joy in discovery on earth and in the heavens.